---
title: Jekyll Tutorial
date: "2018-10-23"
template: post
published: true
---

Last weekend I decided to give my outdated personal website an update and ended up trying out Jekyll. I was pleasantly surprised with Jekyll's ease of use and integration with Github pages. I figured I'd pass along my experience to assist anyone else interested in trying out Jekyll with Github pages.

### Table of Contents

1. Jekyll Setup and Installation
1. Using Jekyll with GitHub Pages
1. Jekyll Common Additions
   - Comments
   - Themes
   - Google Analytics Integration

# Jekyll Setup and Installation

1. rbenv installation

   To install rbenv, follow the [installation instructions](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv#basic-github-checkout) on github. rbenv installation is a quick process when you're using linux and when properly installed even provides tab-completion for the various rbenv commands.

1. Install ruby

   Using rbenv I installed ruby version 2.5.3

   ```code
   rbenv install 2.5.3
   ```

1. Switch to your working directory

   ```code
   mkdir -vp ~/src/my-jekyll-website
   cd ~/src/my-jekyll-website
   ```

1. Set the local ruby version to your newly installed rbenv ruby version

   ```code
   rbenv local 2.5.3
   ```

1. Install Jekyll

   ```code
   gem install jekyll bundler
   ```

1. Jekyll walkthrough

   I would recommend going through the [walkthrough](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/step-by-step/01-setup/) on Jekyll's website if you are new to Jekyll. The walkthough moves fairly quickly and explains all of the basic concepts of Jekyll really well.

# Using Jekyll with GitHub Pages

Using Jekyll with GitHub Pages is an easy way to statically host a website. I've included below the steps to create a new Jekyll website to be hosted on GitHub Pages.

1. Create a new Jekyll website

   ```code
   jekyll new test_website
   ```

1. Move into the new website directory

   ```code
   cd test_website
   ```

1. Initialize a git repository

   ```code
   git init
   ```

1. Create a .gitignore file and add a line for the _site directory

   ```code
   vi .gitignore
   ```

   The _site directory is automatically generated by GitHub from the markdown and html files included in the main project directory and does not need to be included in the repository.

1. Track the project files and push them to the GitHub repository

   For a user page:

   ```code
   git remote add origin your-github-repo
   git add .
   git commit -m 'Initial commit'
   git push
   ```

   For a project page:

   ```code
   git remote add origin your-github-repo
   git checkout -b gh-pages
   git add .
   git commit -m 'Initial gh-pages commit'
   git push
   ```

1. Visit the newly created site

   For a user page:

   ```code
   http(s)://<username>.github.io/
   ```

   For a project page:

   ```code
   http(s)://<username>.github.io/<projectname>
   ```

   **or**

   Run the page locally

   ```code
   bundle exec jekyll serve
   ```

   and visit http://127.0.0.1:4000

# Jekyll Common Additions

## Comments

Comments can be added to a static site using a comment service like [disqus](https://disqus.com/) or [just-comments](https://just-comments.com/). I decided to use disqus on my site and have been happy with the service.

## Themes

GitHub pages supports integration of certain [themes](https://pages.github.com/themes/) without including the layouts and assets from the theme.

These themes can be selected and tested by adding a line to `_config.yml` specifying the theme you wish to use.

ex.

```code
theme: jekyll-theme-cayman
```

The available Jekyll themes can be found in the project's `Gemfile.lock` file. Search for the prefix `jekyll-theme-` to see what is available for use.

## Google Analytics Integration

Most themes support adding Google Analytics. While it varies from theme to theme, the Google Analytics identifier is usually specified in `_config.yml` as a variable like in the example below for the cayman theme.

ex.

```code
google_analytics: UA-XXXXXXXX-X
```